>> My name's Gregg Braden.
I'd like to welcome you to
this very special presentation
of "Missing Links, The
Deep Truth of our Origin,
History, Destiny, and Fate."
In our last episode,
we discovered
that we are literally wired
for healing and longevity,
and that the real life examples
that bring those miraculous
potentials into our lives,
you had the opportunity
to see through the
people who demonstrated
for us in their lives.
In this episode,
we're going to take
this idea of personal
healing and resilience
to the next level of
community and healing.
And we're going to begin
with an ancient map of time
and the guidelines
that it offers us today
as to how we can thrive
in our time of extremes.
Early in this program,
we identified the fact
that we are, in fact, living
what the experts are calling
a time of extremes, a
convergence of cycles that
are wreaking havoc
in the way of life
as we have known it in
the past, the climate
cycles, the economic cycles, and
the cycles of human conflict.
And I intentionally
shared those with you
earlier in the program, so
that we could refer back
to those cycles in
different episodes,
and this is one
of those episodes.
We saw that these cycles
that are converging now,
it's not the first
time it's happened.
They've converged in our
past, and that they appear
to do so on a rhythmic
basis, on a regular basis,
that is approximately
every 5,000 years.
Well, our ancestors knew this.
They prepared for it.
The ancient astronomers,
the Mayan astronomers,
for example, they
dedicated an entire sect
of their population,
the scientists,
to observing the heavens
throughout their entire
lifetimes, and recording
what they observed,
and passing those observations
to the next generation
and the next and the next.
And in this way, they recorded
celestial events and cycles
of time more
accurately in the way
that we did not see again
until late in the 20th century.
And even then, it
wasn't done by people,
it was done by computers using
the data from ice cores and sea
floors to tell us what it is
that happened in the past.
So I'm saying this to
you, because our ancestors
knew that cycles of
change were coming.
They knew that they would
live times of extremes,
because they always happen
when the cycles converge.
And because of that,
they knew that they
had the possibility
and the potential
and they had the honor of
leaving for the next generation
of people that would
come along, what
they had learned in the past
generations for the cycles,
what they meant, how to navigate
these cycles in a healthy way.
Because they didn't
want to just survive
by the skin of their teeth and
get through some tough times.
They were learning
to thrive, to thrive
in the environment of a change.
And the only time that a
change becomes a problem for us
is when we're not
prepared for it.
When we see our
time of extremes,
if we cling to the
old ideas of living
and the old ideas of
what's sustainable,
and we try to implement
those in a world
where those ideas
no longer apply,
that's where the
struggle comes from.
That's where we
find the problems
in our times of extremes.
Well, I want to share
with you an example,
one of the most beautiful, one
of the clearest examples of how
our ancestors were able to
document the times of extremes,
and perhaps more
importantly, how
they were able to
share with us what
it would mean for future
generations, what to look for,
the actual markings
in time in history,
so that we would know
where we are in the cycles
and what it would take for us
in our thinking and the way
we live to get
through these cycles.
I'm talking about
the Hopi map of time.
The ancient Hopi, on the
mesas of northern Arizona
in the United States, have one
of the most continuous records
of their lineage and of their
history from their creation
story forward.
And the Hopi have,
in their homeland,
a very mysterious rock.
It's called Prophecy
Rock on the Third Mesa.
And this rock, they tell
us, even they do not
know for certain who
created the hieroglyphs that
were on this rock.
They don't know the
exact person that did it,
but they have a pretty good
idea of when it happened.
And they have a really
good idea of what
this rock is saying to them.
So what I'd like to do
is share this with you
and some very rare images that
we don't get to see very often.
What you're seeing
on your screen right
now is the major portion
of Prophecy Rock.
And I recognize that the
lines are a little faint.
We had the opportunity
of one of the elders
to take a piece of chalk
and trace through the lines
that you're seeing, so that
the cameras could photograph
these a little bit better.
And I'm going to do
this with a computer.
I'm going to use a computer
to trace across the lines,
so that you can
see on your screen
precisely the timelines
that we're talking about.
So what the Hopi say is at the
end of the last great cycle
of change, what's called
a great world age,
a 5,000-year cycle that is
one fifth of the greater
26,000-year cycle that's called
precession of the equinoxes.
So at the end of that
last 5,000-year cycle,
those who had come before them
their ancestors created this
map.
And it was a map that
told them two things.
It told them when
the cycle ended.
It told them what they
could expect to happen--
big things, landmarks,
milestones of time
as they would go through--
and it would tell them
how to think and live
both on the inner world as
well as the outer world,
so they would successfully
thrive as they
go through the next change.
And they tell us that change
is the change that we're
experiencing right now.
So this Hopi map
of time has been
preserved for a very long time.
And they said they preserved
it for us, for you and me,
so that we can benefit
from their wisdom
and do it today when
we need it the most.
So what is this map
of time telling us?
I'm going to begin on the
left-hand side of the screen.
And what you see is that
I've traced out two paths.
And what the Hopi say is at
the end of the last cycle,
the people of this world
were given the opportunity
to walk two paths
that would carry them
to the end of their time
into the next cycle, where
we are right now.
What makes it so interesting
is that in the beginning,
both paths looked very similar.
And you can see that when
you look on the rock.
They both look very similar,
just in different places.
But if you look
closely, however, you'll
see that the people that
are depicted on each path
are telling a very
different story.
If you look at the
upper path, for example,
there are people there, people
living on the upper path.
Their heads are not
connected to their bodies.
And what the Hopi
elders say is that these
are the people who live in
this time, the people that
walk that path that do
not know themselves.
Their heads are not
connected to their bodies,
because they don't
know who they are.
They've lost themselves.
And if you look
closely at this path,
you see that while it begins
in a very similar fashion
to the one below, as
the path progresses,
it begins to change.
And look at what happens.
It begins to get a little
jagged, a little rough.
It begins to get
steep and an incline.
And if you look closely,
the path ends abruptly.
It goes nowhere.
The path just stops.
But if you look
at the lower path,
it, again, looks very
similar to the one above it.
It looks smooth and
relatively even.
The difference is,
it continues that way
throughout the
entire hieroglyph.
And along the lower path, there
are people depicted as well.
There is an elderly person.
And we know this
person is elderly,
because the person is
leaning over, hunched,
leaning on a cane, which
is a sign of advanced age.
We also know that food
is plentiful on the lower
path, because right
behind the person
is a stock of corn
that is growing,
and that is a sign that food
is abundant on this path.
You don't see any evidence
of that on the path above.
So right off, we're seeing a
distinction between these two
paths.
Now, there is a
third path as well
that may not be as evident.
And I'm going to trace it
out for you on your screen.
It's the green vertical line
that connects the two existing
paths.
That line, the Hopis say,
marks a point in time
that they call the
point of no return.
And for them, that point of
no return was the year 1998.
In 1998, the Hopi sent the
eldest elder of the Hopi nation
to the United Nations
to deliver the message
that this map has left for
the people of the Earth.
And what he said is in 1998,
that we are now living,
this moment in the map of
time, the point of no return.
That while in the
past, it's always
been possible to choose between
the upper and lower path--
and truthfully, we
can always choose--
from 1998 on, it becomes much
more difficult to choose.
So that was the time,
that was the warning, that
was the message that was
delivered to the United Nations
by the Hopi nation in 1998.
And to help them know where
they were on this map,
I'm going to invite you to look
at the image one more time.
And on the lower
path, what you see
are three circles that
straddle this lower path.
The first one on the left is
what the Hopi call the First
Great Shaking of the Earth.
They said, between the time
of the last 5,000-year cycle
beginning and when it ends,
the people of the Earth will go
through these three
great shakings.
And the first shaking they
say is the First World War.
It's already happened.
The second shaking,
you see right next to
that, you probably can guess,
is the Second World War.
And then we see the vertical
line, the point of no return.
And to the right of 1998, we
see the Third Great Shaking.
And when I asked the
elders, I asked them,
I said, does that mean
that we have another war?
What does that shaking mean?
And they said, we don't know.
Our ancestors could
never tell us.
It doesn't mean that
there necessarily
is a war between nations.
It can be a conflict in beliefs.
It can be a conflict
of ideas and ideology.
It could be a
conflict of religion.
It could be a war.
But they said, the
truth is, we don't know.
It's something to watch out
for in this time after 1998
before the end of the
close of this next cycle.
So what does this mean for us?
It's giving us indications.
If you could see further
down on this map,
you would actually
see the hieroglyphs
that identify those circles.
You would see the
swastika, for example,
and the sign of the Rising
Sun, Germany and Japan,
underneath the
World War II cycle.
And you say, how did they know?
How did they know, thousands of
years ago, what kind of symbols
would represent
what's happening now?
Well, this is part of
the mystery of cycles.
We begin to open to
the possibilities
of what is called
fractal time, the fact
that time and history repeats
itself again and again.
This is the wisdom
that our ancestors
tap into in their time, and
still do today, that is largely
discounted by modern science.
And I want to take
this to the next step.
This is the map.
It's telling us
what we can expect.
where we are now.
Wouldn't do us any
good if we didn't
know what to do about it.
So now I'm going
to share with you
another image of the same rock.
And you can see it now.
And on this image-- it's
a little bit different
perspective--
you can see where the upper path
ends abruptly and goes nowhere.
You can also see-- and this is
where the elder has traced out
the images with the chalk--
the lower image, it
reaches a corner,
which is the edge of the
rock, but it doesn't stop.
It continues.
It goes around that
edge, and it keeps going.
They tell us that that edge
is our time of extremes.
That edge is where
we are right now.
And that the path that will
carry us gracefully and allow
us to thrive with food into
advanced age across that path
is the lower path.
So when I had the opportunity
to meet with one of the Hopi
elders, one of the
eldest elders who has
passed and is no longer with us.
Now, I'm not sharing
his name, and I
don't mean to be mysterious,
but in honor of their tradition,
they asked that we not say the
name of someone who has passed,
because it keeps calling
the spirit back to us.
So I'm simply going to say a
recent elder elder who shared
this wisdom with us today.
And what he said is this.
The qualities of both of
these paths, the upper path,
he said, the people that
walk the upper path,
they live in the world of
comfort, greed, and profit.
And I looked at that,
and I thought, ah,
that's interesting.
Profit, especially.
I said, does that mean that
we shouldn't make money?
Does that mean profit
is a bad thing?
He said, no, no, it's
not that kind of profit.
It's not about money.
He said this, is the
kind of profit where
one person or a group
of people benefit
at the expense and the
suffering of another.
Whenever we do better at the
expense of someone else hurting
or doing worse, that's
the kind of profit
that is on the path
that leads nowhere.
It's the path that
ends abruptly.
It's a path that cannot possibly
carry us through our time
of extremes, because it
is not a sustainable path.
And I said, well, what is
this lower path all about?
What are the qualities
of the lower path?
The lower path, and probably
is no surprise to you,
is based upon a different kind
of quality, love, strength,
and balance.
Love, strength, and balance.
And if you look closely at each
of these qualities, what you'll
find is that comfort,
greed, profit, those are
things that we do in the world.
Love, strength,
and balance, those
are things that we
become in our lives.
And this is the essence of many
of the indigenous traditions,
including the Hopi, many
of the ancient traditions.
And now what you know
from quantum physics,
from the hologram, from
entanglement, from the photon
experiments, all the things
that we have talked about,
it all boils down to
this simple principle.
We must become, in
our lives, the things
that we choose to
experience in our world.
We want a world of love,
strength, and balance,
we must become those
things in our lives,
and live them every moment to
the best of our ability day in
and day out, not be out
on the street angrily
protesting that we want
love, strength, and balance.
It's counterproductive.
It makes no sense.
Now you begin to understand why.
So I wanted to
share this with you.
This is the Hopi perspective.
Well, this Hopi wisdom, it
should come as no surprise,
intuitively, we look
at this, we say, well,
of course, that
makes total sense.
Intuitively, it makes sense.
This all goes back to the
ideas of Charles Darwin.
So once again we're
hearkening back
to these ideas in the late
1800s and early 1900s.
Charles Darwin's
ideas of what it
takes to get through
the difficult times
are in direct
competition with what
the Hopi have just told us.
They're in direct opposition,
and they're about competition.
And just to refresh your
memory, what I'd like to do,
I'm going to read Darwin's
words to you once again.
And I mentioned this a
couple of segments earlier.
And what I said is that Darwin
went into the natural world,
and he observed in nature very
specific forms of life-- ants,
birds--
and the way that they behaved.
And what Darwin said,
his insight, he said,
ah what I'm seeing
here in this place
on the Earth in
this moment in time
must be a representative,
a little piece
of a bigger law that applies
to all life everywhere
all the time.
And as I mentioned
earlier, I think
this is where he went wrong.
This is a dangerous,
dangerous way to think.
Let me read you
Darwin's precise words,
so you can see his thinking
and why this is so dangerous.
In his book "Origin of
Species," what Darwin said,
he believed that
life was a struggle.
And while he believed
that on the one hand,
he also prefaces his
own words by telling us
what he's about to say to us
doesn't make a lot of sense.
So I want you to see
what he's saying,
and just hear his own words.
Darwin said, quote, it may
not be a logical deduction,
but it is far more satisfactory
to look at instincts,
such as ants making
slaves of other ants
as small examples of
one general law leading
to the advancement
of all beings.
And that law is the law that
says we should multiply.
We should vary, let
the strongest live,
and the weakest die.
Let the strongest live
This is such a
dangerous way to think.
And it's dangerous for
a couple of reasons,
particularly because of
when it was introduced,
late 1800s, early 1900s.
This is when the great
wars were being fought.
This is when the thinking
that was being created of how
people relate to other people.
Darwin is telling
us that when he
saw the ants capture
another colony of ants,
they didn't kill them.
They enslaved them
and made them work.
He said that is a reflection
of the general law.
Let the strongest live
and the weakest die.
This later became
survival of the fittest.
Darwin called it survival
of the strongest.
And he said this
in his own words.
And I want you to know that.
So I'm not mincing words.
Survival of the strongest.
The ideas of the great genocides
and the great suffering
of the late 1800s, the 1900s
throughout the 20th century
are directly linked
to this thinking.
If you look at the manifestos
and you look at the writings
and you look at the lengths
of the greatest acts of war,
aggression, and genocide,
the philosophies
are directly based
and sometimes quoted.
I'm not saying
Darwin intended this.
But this is how a dangerous
thinking like this
can be misinterpreted
and applied
in horrible ways that
create tremendous suffering
in our world.
And it's based on
something that's not true.
This is a false
assumption of science,
and that's the good news.
That's the good news I want
to share with you right now.
The best science
of the modern world
is now telling us one
of the deepest truths,
I believe, that has the
greatest impact, the greatest
consequence on our world as a
whole, on your life and my life
individually.
If you think back to the
inverted pyramid that
began this entire series,
it was in episode number
two, when we talked about the
false assumptions of science.
Assumption number six, at
the top of the pyramid,
was that the fundamental
law of nature
is based upon competition,
conflict, and struggle.
And that comes directly
from Darwin's ideas
that were embraced,
and not questioned,
in late 1800s and early 1900s.
It is deeply ingrained as the
fabric of our very society.
The economic system
that's collapsing
right now, the way that we're
dealing with differences
between nations unsuccessfully,
the way that we are trying
to share resources, food, water,
oil, energy, communications,
defense, all of these things
are based in this idea
of survival of the strongest.
And in our time of
extremes, as our ideas
and what we think
about ourselves
and our beliefs are being
pushed to the limits,
because the extremes are
changing the environment where
they've been applied, the ideas
have been applied in the past,
all those ideas
are breaking down.
They're not working.
They can't work, because
they're not true.
They're based in
false assumptions.
And this idea of cooperation
versus competition, this
is key.
So I want to share
this with you.
I'm going to take a
minute to do this.
I think it's important.
The best science
of the modern world
is now telling us that, in fact,
the fundamental rule of nature
is cooperation and
what biologists
call mutual aid, not competition
and conflict and survival.
Now, we all know that
competition, conflict,
and survival, they're a fact.
They happen.
We see them all the time.
They're not the
fundamental rule.
And to the degree that we
see violence, competition,
and conflict, to the degree
that we see that happening, what
we're actually witnessing is
how far we or any population
has strayed from the harmony
of the deepest truth of nature.
It tells us the more
violence and conflict we see,
it tells us how far we've
strayed from the natural laws
of this world.
And if we believe
that we somehow
are separate from
nature, that we
don't have to abide by the
fundamental laws of nature
that all the forms
of life abide by,
that is the opening
to our demise.
We've seen this happen in the
past with other civilizations
and other cultures.
There's a powerful lesson
that we can learn from this.
And our own science, the best
science of the modern world,
gives us the reason to
change our thinking.
We don't have to do it on faith.
We don't have to do it on trust.
Because we've asked
science to tell us
the deep truths of
our lives, now science
is revealing those truths.
The question is, will
we embrace those truths?
Well, here is the truth of what
Darwin said about cooperation.
There was a study that was done.
Over 400 papers were
written, asking the question
about competition and conflict.
Specifically, the
question was this.
What is the optimum amount of
competition in any situation,
in any place?
And when I say
competition, I just
want be very clear
of what I'm saying.
I'm not talking about a
friendly game of soccer or chess
or checkers at the
family dinner table.
When we say competition,
this is what biologists
call violent competition, OK?
What is the optimum amount
of violent competition
in the world?
Over 400 studies came
up with the same answer.
And once again for clarity, I
want to read to you directly
the results of that study.
In his book entitled
"No Contest, The Case
Against Competition,"
Alfie Kohn wrote, quote,
the ideal amount of violent
competition in any environment,
in the classroom,
in the workplace,
in the family in the
playing field, is none.
He said, violent
competition always, always,
always is destructive.
So this is one of
the first cases.
Late in the 20th
century, this was
in the 1990s, when these
studies were published,
and they opened the
door to a possibility.
Scientists began saying,
what if we're wrong?
What if the ideas that we've
embraced about competition
and conflict that are
reflected in our economy, that
are reflected in
our defense policy,
reflected in the way we
deal with other nations,
what if they're wrong?
And that led to
even more studies.
Alfie Kohn was one of the first.
But from there, scientists began
writing about this competition.
And what they found
in the year 2008
made headlines in one
of the most prestigious
scientific journals.
It's called "New Scientist."
There was an entire issue
based upon evolution.
And once again, not my words.
I want you to hear exactly the
words, the conclusions of what
this article is saying to us.
In an article by
Michael Le Page,
it was entitled "Evolution
myths, survival of the fittest
justifies everyone
for themselves,"
the "New Scientist,"
edition April 2008.
What Michael Le
Page said is this.
He said, quote, what
we see in the wild
is not every animal
out for itself.
He said, cooperation is an
incredibly successful survival
strategy.
And then he went
on to clarify that.
He said, when
cooperation breaks down,
the results can be disastrous.
End of quote.
So what Michael Le Page is
saying in "New Scientist"
and what that scientific
thinking is now
that is willing to embrace
the facts of what we're seeing
along these lines is that
it's not every animal out
for themselves.
There is violent competition,
but that competition
is part of a higher
order that we
see in the animal
kingdom that is actually
a form of cooperation.
When we see the weakest of
one form of life succumb
to other forms of life, that
is a cooperative endeavor.
It is not animal against animal
fighting for the survival
of their lives.
The same principle now that
we're seeing in science--
this is science--
it's telling us that what we've
been thinking about our deepest
truth is not necessarily
the deepest truth.
The biology now is reflected
in the archeology of our past.
This is fascinating to me.
Let me say it again.
The biology of this
discovery is reflected
in the archeology of our past.
Here's what I mean by that.
The biology is
telling us that we
live in this world of
cooperation and mutual aid
where conflict may
occur sometimes.
Now, I'm going to
go back to some
of the archaeological
sites that we talked
about earlier in
this episode, and I'm
going to reveal something now
that we didn't talk about then,
so that we can do it right now.
There is a mystery
that scientists
have found when
they are uncovering
some of those ancient sites,
the ancient civilizations that
are older than 5,000 years.
So remember, 5,000
years is when we're
taught civilization began.
I shared with you
earlier in this program
the evidence that
tells us there's
another cycle before that.
So I'm going to share with you
some of the hallmarks of this
previous 5,000-year cycle,
whether we're talking about
Gobekli Tepe, or whether
we're talking about the Gulf
of Khambhat off the coast of
India under 120 feet of water,
or whether we're talking
about Catalhoyuk--
now, didn't I
identify specifically,
did I mention it in Turkey
along with Gobekli Tepe--
or whether we're talking
about Caral, the oldest
technologically advanced
civilization in all
the Americas that's now
located in northern Peru,
there's a common theme
through all of these.
And the theme is amazing.
Every one of these sites, there
is no evidence of any weapons
that has been discovered in
any of these ancient sites
or others within this
5,000-year window.
There is no evidence
of mass war.
No evidence of mass graves.
No walls to protect the homes.
No walls protect
the communities.
No evidence of mutilated
bodies that you
would expect to see
from armies facing off
against other armies and the
result of ancient warfare.
It simply does not exist in
this block of archaeological
discoveries, this 5,000-year
block before our cycle began.
Why is that?
If we are to believe what
the texts themselves tell us,
they say that before we began
our cycle of war, darkness,
and violence 5,000 years
ago that now has brought us
to the point of extremes
where we are now,
the cycle before was a
very different cycle.
It was a golden age of
peace and cooperation.
And that the cycles
alternate one
after another, war,
peace, war and peace,
triggered by the climate
change and the competition
for resources when
that is needed.
What does that mean for us?
We've just crossed that
5,000-year mark, all right?
We are now into the next cycle.
The question is,
will we perpetuate
the cycle of war and violence
from our last 5,000 years?
Or will we choose a golden
age of peace and cooperation
based on the deepest
truth of nature,
and the harmony that
we know is possible?
In our next episode,
we're going to take
this idea of localized
change and peace and harmony
to another level,
to a global level.
And in doing so, we'll discover
the revolutionary science
that tells us that our
personal choices, what's
happening in here, is the
key to global cooperation
and lasting peace in
the world out there.
Thank you for joining
me for this program.
And be sure to tune in for
our next all-new episode
of "Missing Links, The
Deep Truth of our Origin,
History, Destiny, and Fate."